Token overview (SOFTWARE-5077) (#941)
opensciencegrid/docs: docs/security/tokens/overview.md

DateReviewed: 2022-03-10

> =======

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I don't think this is actually necessary looking at our other docs with `DateReviewed` metadata

For example, a token used for storage access can restrict the files that can be read to a particular directory tree.
Instead of using a single proxy, a job may have multiple tokens.
For example the job could have one token granting it the ability to be run;
it could have a token for read access to an input dataset, and a token for write access to a results directory.

Token Components
----------------

Bearer tokens are credential strings in the [JSON Web Token (JWT)](https://jwt.io) format.
A JWT consists of a JSON header, a JSON payload, and a signature that can be verified.
The payload contains a number of fields, called "claims", that describe the token and what it can access.

There are two JWT-based token standards that can be used with OSG software: [SciTokens](https://scitokens.org)
and [WLCG Tokens](https://github.com/WLCG-AuthZ-WG/common-jwt-profile/blob/master/profile.md).
These standards describe the claims that are used in the payload of the JWT.

SciTokens and WLCG Tokens are similar standards and have some common claims:

**Issuer ("iss")**

The issuer identifies the organization that issued the token.
An issuer looks like an HTTPS URL;

> this URL must be valid and publicly accessible because it is used by services to validate the token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this URL must be valid and publicly accessible as they are used by site services to validate the token.
```

> Token issuers will be described below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Token issuers will be described below.
```

We should add a link to the relevant subsection here

**Subject ("sub")**

The subject identifies an entity (which could be a human or a robot) that owns the token.
Unlike the subject of an X.509 certificate, a token subject does not need to be globally unique,
only unique to the issuer.

> Subjects will be elaborated on below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subjects will be elaborated on below.
```

Another link

**Issued-at ("iat"), not-before ("nbf"), expiration ("exp")**

These claims are Unix timestamps that specify when the token was issued, and its lifespan.

**Audience ("aud")**

The audience is a server (or a JSON list of servers) that the token may be used on;
it is typically a hostname, host:port, or URI.
For example a token used for submitting a job to a CE would have
`<CE FQDN>:<CE PORT>` in the `aud` claim.
The special values `ANY` (SciTokens) or `https://wlcg.cern.ch/jwt/v1/any` (WLCG Tokens) allow the token to be
used on any server.

**Scope ("scope")**

The scope limits the actions that can be made using the token.
The format of the scope claim differs between SciTokens and WLCG Tokens;

> scopes in use by OSG services will be listed below.

Reviewer: Link!

    

### Issuer ###

To generate bearer tokens, a collaboration must adminster at least one "token issuer" to issue tokens to their users.
In addition to generating and signing tokens, token issuers provide a public endpoint that can be used to validate an
issued token,
e.g. an OSG Compute Entrypoint (CE) will contact the token issuer to authorize a bearer token used for pilot job
submission.

The issuer is listed in the `iss` claim; this should be an HTTPS URL of a web server.
This server must have the public key that can be used to validate the token in a well-known location,
as described by the [OpenID Connect Discovery standard](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-discovery-1_0.html).
If the issuer is down, or the the public key cannot be downloaded, the token cannot be verified

> and will be rejected.

Reviewer: One thing to note is that clients of a token issuer will cache the public key for a few hours (and technically that cache is 4 days right now to help ease the transition to tokens while collabs spin up their token issuers)

Author: Added

SCITOKENS /^https\:\/\/cilogon\.org\/gm2,gm2pilot\@fnal\.gov$/ gm2pilot
```
These are regular expressions; the first matches a token with the issuer `https://scitokens.org/ligo`
and any subject, and maps it to the `ligo` user.
Note the trailing `,` in the regular expression: this separates the issuer from the subject.

The second example matches the issuer `https://cilogon.org/gm2` _and_ the subject `gm2pilot@fnal.gov`,
and maps it to the `gm2pilot` user.

A `SCITOKENS` mapfile line supports WLCG tokens as well.
Note that mapping can only be done on issuer and subject, _not_ `wlcg.groups`.

See the [configuring authentication documentation for HTCondor-CE]
(https://opensciencegrid.org/docs/compute-element/install-htcondor-ce/#configuring-authentication)
for further information.

Using Bearer Tokens with XRootD
-------------------------------

In order to support Token AAI, your XRootD installation must be based on OSG 3.6 or OSG 3.5-upcoming.
You will need XRootD 5.0.2 or newer, with the `xrootd-scitokens` plugin.
Follow the [configuring XRootD authorization documentation](https://opensciencegrid.org/docs/data/xrootd/xrootd-authorization)

> for information on how to configure XRootD to accept bearer tokens.

Author: Moved them to #946

| IceCube       | Undergoing testing        |
| LIGO          | Undergoing testing        |
| OSG           | N/A                       |

Debugging Tokens
----------------

Validating a token:

A token must be a _one-line_ string consisting of 3 base64-encoded parts separated by periods (`.`).
You can use the tools in the `scitokens-cpp` RPM to validate a SciToken or WLCG token.

-   Run `scitokens-verify <TOKEN>` (where `<TOKEN>` is the text of the token) to validate the token using the issuer.

-   Run `scitokens-list-access <TOKEN> <ISSUER> <AUDIENCE>` (where `<TOKEN>` is the text of the token,
    `<ISSUER>` is the issuer to verify the token with,
    and `<AUDIENCE>` is the server you are using the token to access).

Examining a token:

-   Online: paste the token into <https://jwt.io>.

-   Offline:
    1.  Write the token to a file named `tok`.
    2.  Run `IFS=. read header payload signature < tok`.
    3.  Run `echo $header | base64 -d` to examine the header.
        Run `echo $payload | base64 -d` to examine the payload.
        Note: the header or payload may be missing the final padding characters (up to 2 `=` characters);

>         adding them (e.g. `echo $payload== | base64 -d`) should make base64 stop complaining about "invalid input" or "truncated input".

Reviewer: Let's throw this into the client doc instead that's ready

Author: Done
